Project Assessment, 20100504, jasonb

It is very close to five months since the original project assessment that resulted in the recent resurgence. This resurgence included the completion of 28 formal technical reports and 19 algorithm descriptions. 

The approach has worked in the short term, although is starting to wane. 

It has become increasingly difficult to find the contiguous time required to complete the sections of the technical reports for algorithm descriptions, and as I believe, even boring.  

A web site was worked on for a considerable amount of time last month providing a content management system for sections of the book, to be launched when half (25) of the algorithm descriptions are written. In the mean time, a 'smoke test' site has been launched, advertising the project and collecting email addresses of interested parties. At this time it seems that most of the interest is for a free version of the book, with some interest in a paid PDF version. 

With this being said, motivation to continue to write the algorithm descriptions themselves has slipped. The last chapter describing evolutionary algorithms has taken more than two months (March and April) and still one algorithm remains outstanding. This is with some level of algorithm description already prepared form most of the evolutionary algorithms in deprecated work. 

The approach of preparing semi-formal work product in the form of discrete technical reports is effective. The problem is the amount of 'loading' required before such a technical report can be written. Specifically, although each algorithm description is partitioned into discrete and semi-separate sub-sections, these sub-sections cannot be written in isolation, instead requiring a broader and deeper understanding of the technique itself. With such an understanding, the sub-sections can be targeted and completed in an ad hoc manner, without it, one requires a contiguous block of free time to perform the necessary research and knowledge loading.

This 'loading problem' is eased with prior knowledge of a given technique, and this easing has been demonstrated - with a high-productivity case resulting in one algorithm description per day for three days. Most of the algorithms in the book were chosen given their popularity, and given the authors prior knowledge, so most algorithm descriptions will likely exploit this easing in their loading time.

Prolonged focus is needed and motivation must be re-built.

A short-term gain in motivation may be achieved by targeting those algorithms which the author has an explicit prior history. This may result in the completion of algorithm descriptions out of book-order, but the gains to the project are likely to be significant. 

Routine must be sought, and contiguous blocks of time must be tasked. A critical mass of algorithms is needed for a minimum book to be published, perhaps 30 descriptions, and this minimum must be achieved well before a to-be-determined late 2010 writing cut-off date.

Focus. Routine. Slowly build motivation.