Project Assessment 20101103, Jason Brownlee

It is November 2010, leaving approximately 3 months to complete this book project (according to the original deadline). I think the deadline should stand, and I think the content and scope of the book should be adapted according - if need be.

It has been many months since I have actively participated on this project. Work has been busy and I have been distracted with machine learning competitions on Kaggle.com. Nevertheless, I have organized to take two weeks of at the end of this month to focus efforts on getting the project back on track. I have also organized with my old PhD advisor to get a desk in his research group for the two weeks. This will likely provide the stimulation and motivation to make large contributions to the project over the coming two months. Ideally, I'ld like to have the majority of the content completed by Christmas 2010, optimistic I know.

In preparation I conducted a survey of all users that signed up with interest in the book. I asked ~13 questions on a range of topics about algorithm selection, content communication, and the importance of different factors of algorithm descriptions. I received >100 responses and the results are interesting. Given some free time and motivation, I intent to formalize the results so that I can exploit the knowledge about the potential market in the preparation of the book.

Finally, I have made contact with an honors student who I would like to employ to prepare unit tests for all algorithms described in the book. I have provided an example of what is expected and am awaiting a sample of his work before committing further. I am hopeful that a suite of unit tests will refine the quality of the code provided in the book - likely the weakest point at this time. 

I did some investigation of outsourced design for the book jacket. I believe I will use the design freelancing site 99designs. A book jacket can be a few hundred dollars and looks very impressive. I will need to know the specific details of the jacket before placing the add. There is an image that captured my attention that I would like to put forward as a motivation for the book cover - it is an image for an iphone internet radio app pandora. It is blue with lots of small lightly colored samples and it reminds me of sampling a space. 

I have also been thinking about the method for presenting the content on the web. I think an approach similar to that used by 'real world haskell' would be ideal, where comments can be added per section or per paragraph, providing a forum for refining the content and discussing the meaning of specific sections.

I am thinking that the advanced topics will have to slip from the book. I believe that they are important, but I think the time may be better spent preparing the algorithm descriptions. I'd really like to make it to the target of 50 algorithms described. The advanced topics can be written after and be included in a second revision, or be used in blog posts as promotional material for the book.

All effort now must be focused on stamping out algorithm descriptions. There is a temptation to push out the website and start to garner feedback, but I think it could be too early and too much of a distraction. 

Regarding the selection of algorithms, I had considered to include a selection of neural networks. I am fond of the field, but I don't think it fits the feel of the book. I am focused on metaheuristics and similar, and the neural nets don't gel with the rest of the algorithms described. I will delay this decision for now.

An interesting idea that came out of some ad hoc discussions was the idea of showing "search behaviour" visually. Something like an animated gif of the algorithm sampling the search space. I really like this idea, it will add a lot of value to the website. 