Island Population Model Genetic Algorithm - Overview
Jason Brownlee

Inspiration (effect)
The inspiration for the island population genetic algorithm is the shifting balance theory of populations where localized mate selection strategies facilitate the divergence of a population into multiple sub populations that exploit different ecological niches.

More specifically, the inspiration for island population genetic algorithm are punctuated equilibria effect that observes periods of evolutionary status followed by rapid evolutionary process (change or varied adaptive fit).

Strategy (method)
The island population genetic algorithm strategy was designed to exploit parallel hardware to accelerate the genetic algorithm. The strategy involves maintaining multiple sequential genetic algorithms (islands) that compete independently for extended periods interspersed with periods of communication where candidate solutions are shared between the islands.

The strategies realizes a punctuated equilibrium effect where semi-separated populations compute for periods towards convergence (evolutionary stasis) and communicate at intervals resulting in brief periods of change within the population (rapid evolutionary progress). The approach provides the exploration and exploitation required by a genetic algorithm at a high level of abstraction via computation and communication.

Procedure (algorithm/system)
The island population genetic algorithm is a course grained parallel evolutionary approach, named as such given the low ratio of communication to computation. The cellular genetic algorithm is an example of a fine grained parallel evolutionary algorithm approach. The procedure was designed to exploit course grained parallel hardware (shared memory and message passing frameworks like computer networks) to accelerate the execution of the genetic algorithm (same result in less time). 

Interestingly, the approach can lead to a better result in less time and promotes a concurrent (set of independent events) perspective on the genetic algorithm. As such the island model may be a more efficient approach (better result in same time) for some problems without the use of parallel hardware. That is, a logical partitioning of a genetic algorithm population without necessarily a one-to-one physical mapping of computers/CPU's. 

The approach is realized as a set of sequential genetic algorithms, typically executed in parallel. The islands are typically genetic algorithms although other evolutionary algorithms can be used. 

The important addition is the use of a migration operator that permits candidate solutions to move from one population to another. The island populations are organized in a graph topology where populations are node, and communication channels are directed or undirected edges. Example topologies are rings, trees, and stars. Migration requires the selection of migration population members, the selection of a neighbouring population to migrate to, and the assimilation of the emigrants into the population. 

Typically the configuration of the island algorithms is the same, although some configuration vary configurations such as the amount of mutation to promote more or less exploration across the populations. Population sizes and connectivity are constant. This means migrants are copied and removed one island and displace members from another population. One must select the frequency of migration events defined as the number of generations of stasis sufficient to promote some convergence, and the amplitude of migration events which is the number of emigrating candidate solutions. 

Heuristics
* Island population models are a course grained parallel evolutionary algorithm approach designed for networks of machines, although the benefits of the approach can be achieved on a single machine (better results sooner)
* Migration frequency and amplitude are configured to elicit a useful punctuated equilibria effect in between no migration (isolated islands equivalent to multiple restarts of one GA) and the simulation of one large super population (amplitude or frequency too high).
* Selection of members is typically random, probabilistic fitness-based sampling can be useful, but too greedy results in premature convergence.

Further Reading
* EC, Chapter 15 Island (migration) modes: evolutionary algorithms based on punctuated equilibria
